The **Event Loop** is a fundamental concept in JavaScript (and other programming languages like Node.js) that allows JavaScript to perform **non-blocking asynchronous operations** despite being single-threaded. It ensures that your code is executed efficiently without freezing or blocking other operations like UI rendering.

### Key Concepts of the Event Loop

1. **Single-Threaded Nature of JavaScript**:
   - JavaScript runs in a single thread, meaning it can only execute one operation at a time.
   - However, JavaScript can handle multiple asynchronous tasks (like I/O operations, HTTP requests, or timers) without blocking the execution of the rest of the code. This is where the event loop comes in.

2. **Call Stack**:
   - The call stack is a stack data structure that keeps track of function calls. 
   - When a function is called, it's added to the stack. When the function finishes, it's removed from the stack.
   - The JavaScript engine processes the call stack one operation at a time.

3. **Web APIs**:
   - Web APIs (such as `setTimeout()`, `fetch()`, and `DOM events`) are built-in browser features that allow you to perform asynchronous operations.
   - These Web APIs run outside of the JavaScript engine (in the browser's environment) and are handled by the browser.

4. **Callback Queue (or Message Queue)**:
   - When an asynchronous task completes (like a timer or an HTTP request), the callback (a function) associated with that task is pushed to the **callback queue**.
   - This queue stores functions that are ready to be executed after the current execution context (the call stack) is cleared.

5. **Event Loop**:
   - The event loop constantly checks the call stack to see if it's empty.
   - If the call stack is empty, the event loop pushes the first function from the callback queue to the call stack for execution.
   - This process ensures that the JavaScript engine handles asynchronous tasks after completing the current synchronous code.

### How the Event Loop Works

Here's a step-by-step explanation of how the event loop manages synchronous and asynchronous code:

1. **Synchronous Code**:
   - Synchronous code is executed in the order it appears in the script.
   - Each synchronous operation is added to the call stack and executed one by one.
   - If a synchronous operation takes a long time (e.g., a loop), it will block the event loop and delay the execution of other tasks.

2. **Asynchronous Code**:
   - When asynchronous code (like `setTimeout()`, `fetch()`, or event listeners) is encountered, the task is passed to the Web API.
   - Once the asynchronous task completes, its callback function is placed in the **callback queue**.

3. **Event Loop's Role**:
   - The event loop keeps checking if the call stack is empty.
   - When the call stack is empty, it moves the first function from the callback queue to the call stack.
   - This continues until all tasks in the callback queue are processed.

### Example: Basic Event Loop

Let's look at a simple example to understand how the event loop works:

```javascript
console.log('Start');

setTimeout(function() {
  console.log('Timeout 1');
}, 2000);

setTimeout(function() {
  console.log('Timeout 2');
}, 0);

console.log('End');
```

### Step-by-Step Execution:

1. **Start**: The first `console.log('Start')` is executed and printed to the console.
2. **setTimeout(2000)**: The first `setTimeout` is encountered with a delay of 2000 ms. The callback function is passed to the Web API for later execution.
3. **setTimeout(0)**: The second `setTimeout` is encountered with a delay of 0 ms. This callback function is also passed to the Web API.
4. **End**: The second `console.log('End')` is executed and printed immediately.
5. **Callback Queue**:
   - After 0 ms, the second `setTimeout` callback is moved to the callback queue and is ready to execute. But it will only be executed after the current call stack is empty.
   - After 2000 ms, the first `setTimeout` callback is placed in the callback queue and is ready for execution.
6. **Event Loop**: The event loop checks the call stack and finds it empty.
   - It then moves the second `setTimeout` callback from the callback queue to the call stack, prints `'Timeout 2'`.
   - Finally, the first `setTimeout` callback is executed after 2000 ms, printing `'Timeout 1'`.

### Output:
```
Start
End
Timeout 2
Timeout 1
```

### Why Does `Timeout 2` Run First?

Even though `setTimeout(0)` was called after `setTimeout(2000)`, the callback for `setTimeout(0)` is placed in the callback queue first. However, the event loop only processes the queue once the call stack is empty. So, `'Timeout 2'` is printed first, even though it had a `0` ms delay.

### Microtask Queue (Next Tick)

There is another queue called the **microtask queue**, which has a higher priority than the callback queue. Promises and some other asynchronous operations (like `MutationObserver`) are placed in the microtask queue.

The event loop checks the **microtask queue** **before** processing the callback queue, even if the callback queue has tasks ready.

### Example with Promises:

```javascript
console.log('Start');

setTimeout(() => {
  console.log('Timeout');
}, 0);

Promise.resolve().then(() => {
  console.log('Promise');
});

console.log('End');
```

### Output:
```
Start
End
Promise
Timeout
```

### Explanation:
- The `Promise` is placed in the microtask queue and has higher priority than the `setTimeout` callback, which is placed in the callback queue.
- The event loop processes the microtask queue before the callback queue, so `'Promise'` is logged before `'Timeout'`.

### Conclusion

The **event loop** allows JavaScript to handle asynchronous operations efficiently by non-blocking execution. It ensures that long-running tasks like I/O operations, timers, and API calls don't block the execution of other code. By utilizing the call stack, callback queue, and microtask queue, JavaScript can manage multiple operations concurrently in a single-threaded environment.

